Network partision
- If there is any problem with communication among nodes in distributed system, we say that we have a network partision.

Availability

Availability means that every request receives a non-error response, without any guarantees on whether it reflects the most recent write request.

Consistency

Consistency means that every successful read request receives the result of the most recent write request.


CAP theorem

According to the final statement of the CAP theorem, a distributed system can be either consistent or available in the presence of a network partition.

Importance of CAP theorem

The CAP theorem forces designers of distributed systems to make explicit trade-offs between availability and consistency. 
Once the engineers become aware of these properties, they choose the appropriate system.

Trade-off between latency and consistency

When no network partition is present during normal operation, there’s a different trade-off between latency and consistency.

An example of this trade-off is the single-master replication scheme. In this setting, the synchronous replication approach would favor consistency over latency. Meanwhile, asynchronous replication would reduce latency at the cost of consistency.

PACELC theorem

In the case of a network partition (P), the system has to choose between availability (A) and consistency (C) but else (E), 
when the system operates normally in the absence of network partitions, 
the system has to choose between latency (L) and consistency (C).

These sub-categories are combined to form the following four categories:

AP/EL
CP/EL
AP/EC
CP/EC

A system from the AP/EL category prioritizes availability during a network partition and latency during a normal operation.

There are still systems we cannot strictly classify into these categories. 
This is because they have various levers that can tune the system differently when needed. 
Still, this theorem serves as a good indicator of the various forces at play in a distributed system.